TiKV Command Line RFC (#21)
tikv/rfcs: text/2019-02-26-tikv-client-command-line.md

functionality. It will utilize `clap` to provide a simple wrapper around the
crate API.

### Install

We will build this tool in the `tikv-cli` repository. It will be published.
Users will be able to install it with `cargo install tikv-cli`. (See
*Alternatives* for another option.)

### Configuration

The tool will retrieve its configuration from one of the following places, in
order of precedence (greatest to least):

* The command line options, such as `--pd 127.0.0.1:2379`.
* A local configuration file `./.tikv-cli.toml`
* The global configuration file `${XDG_CONFIG_HOME}/tikv-cli.toml`.
* The default options (connect to localhost, no TLS).

The options are:

```toml
[connection]
# A list of `pd` endpoints.
pd_endpoints = [
    "127.0.0.1:2379",
    "127.0.0.2:2379",
]

[tls]
# The path of the CA file for TLS.
ca_path = "./rsa.ca"
# The path of the certificate file for TLS.
cert_path = "./rsa.cert"
# The path of the key file for TLS.
key_path = "./rsa.key"

[output]
# If the ouput JSON should be minified.
minify = false
# Level of logging to use. Available: error. warn, info, debug, trace
logging = "info"

> ```

Reviewer: What are the values here? I expected them to be defaults, but that doesn't match the text. (I would also expect the default log level to be `error`, or possibly `warning`.

Author: Should be all of these: https://docs.rs/slog/2.4.1/slog/enum.Level.html, good catch.

### Input/Output

By default input is by positional arguments in `bash`/`sh` string format.

By default the tool will output in prettyprinted JSON. For single entry results,
it will return a string (including `"`), for key-value pairs it will use a JSON
object `{ key: "", value: "" }`, for multiple results it will return a JSON
array. Errors will use an `{ error: "" }` object. Opting out of prettyprint will
be via the `--minify` flag.

JSON was chosen because it is an efficient, pervasive, human-readable, modern
standard that has many tools (eg `jq`) to use for post processing if needed.

> All standard (non-logging) output will be on `stdout`.

Reviewer: To clarify, "standard (non-logging) output" means the json stuff above? It would be good to mention that the total output on stdout will be valid JSON (will this be the case for stderr too?).

Author: Yes the intention is to make sure the output is fairly consistent on stdout so folks can use it in scripts.

It will feature configurable logging levels with `slog` which will output to `stderr`.

The tool will exit zero on successful requests, and non-zero on unsuccessful
requests. In the case of REPL mode, it shall always exit zero.

### Interacting with it

Users will interact with the tool through the command line. It will support both
a one-off mode or a REPL (Read-eval-print-loop) style mode (See alternatives).

> Example of the one-off raw mode:

Reviewer: Could you explain what "raw" means before using it here.

```bash
$ tikv-cli raw set "cncf" "linux foundation"
Finished in 0.001s.
$ tikv-cli raw set "tikv" "rust"
Finished in 0.001s.
$ tikv-cli raw get "cncf"
"linux foundation"
Finished in 0.002s.
$ tikv-cli raw scan "b"..
[
    { key: "cncf", value: "linux foundation" },
    { key: "tikv", value: "rust" },
]
Finished in 0.003s.

> ```

Reviewer: These "Finished in 0.003s.", will they be on stderr or stdout? Are they configurable?

Author: I think these should be stderr.

Author: Added a switch for these

Example of REPL raw mode:

```bash
$ tikv-cli raw
> set "cncf" "linux foundation"
Finished in 0.001s.
> set "tikv" "rust"
Finished in 0.001s.
> get "cncf"
"linux foundation"
Finished in 0.001s.
> scan "b"..
[
    { key: "cncf", value: "linux foundation" },
    { key: "tikv", value: "rust" },
]
Finished in 0.003s.
```

REPL transactional mode, notice how the `>>` communicates that the user is in a
transaction. Also notice how the transaction timestamp is outputted in the

> request complete messages.

Reviewer: Why do we need a transactional one-off mode? Could we take multiple commands as input and thus avoid making a distinction between raw and txn modes?

Author: In theory transactional one-off won't be used much.

```bash
$ tikv-cli txn
> begin
Finished in 0.000s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
>>set "cncf" "linux foundation"
Finished in 0.001s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
>> set "tikv" "rust"
Finished in 0.001s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
>> get "cncf"
"linux foundation"
Finished in 0.001s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
>> scan "b"..
[
    { key: "cncf", value: "linux foundation" },
    { key: "tikv", value: "rust" },
]
Finished in 0.003s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
> commit
Finished in 0.001s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
```

One-off transactional mode is a bit different, as we need some way to maintain

> timestamp across commands. The user may choose how to do this, the reccomended

Reviewer 2: recommended

Author: Oh, damn. Thanks.

way is via ENV variables, but they must do this. (See alternatives)

```bash
$ TS=$(tikv-cli txn begin)
$ tikv-cli txn ${TS} set "cncf" "linux foundation"
Finished in 0.001s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
$ tikv-cli txn ${TS} set "tikv" "rust"
Finished in 0.001s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
$ tikv-cli txn ${TS} get "cncf"
"linux foundation"
Finished in 0.002s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
$ tikv-cli txn ${TS} scan "b"..
[
    { key: "cncf", value: "linux foundation" },
    { key: "tikv", value: "rust" },
]
Finished in 0.003s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
$ tikv-cli txn ${TS} commit
Finished in 0.004s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
```

## Drawbacks

> We may not wish to need to maintain this tool, or we may wish for the community

Reviewer 2: 'wish to' or 'need to' ?

Author: I think I can reword this, but I meant to say "It increases maintenance burden"...

> to maintain it.

Reviewer: I think the drawback here is the maintenance burden. We'll need to find some way to handle that. I don't think we need to specify how we handle that here, just be aware that there is this cost.

Author: Does the sentence present not communicate this correctly? Because that's exactly what I meant to say. :)

## Alternatives

* *(Installation/Repo)* We could use the `tikv-client` repository and provide
  either an opt-out or an opt-in binary from `src/bin/tikv-cli.rs`. If we chose
  an opt-in functionality here users mgiht end up with an awkard installation
  call.
* (*Use `tikv-cli`*), we could use `tikv-cli` for this, but it creates as fuzzy
  distinction between management tools and clients.

> * (*No REPL, or only REPL*). We may chose to not have a REPL mode, or we may chose

Reviewer 2: I rarely use one off mode of mysql client. But I think running commands from file is very useful.

Author: Is there an advantage to just piping to the REPL?

Reviewer 2: Hm, it actually doesn't make much difference. It's just something that I would expect to have as it is in mysql and hive client.

Author: What do you think @siddontang ?

Reviewer: I think it is good to have both, and I don't think it adds too much complexity (as long as we can remove the need for raw and txn modes as described above).

  to *only* have a REPL mode.
* (*A different timestamp handling for one-off mode*). We may find the way we
  handle timestamps in transactional one-off mode to be unwieldly. Perhaps there

>   is a better way.

Reviewer: Is this standard in other clients? (MySQL in particular). If not, I would think some way of handling multiple commands at once would work. I guess the use case we want to handle is a script which adds commands to a transaction based on the results of earlier commands in the transaction. Unless there is some clear need for that, then I'd imagine that use case is better supported using an API and we should explicitly not support it.

Author: Part of the reason it's defined this way is that we don't have a text representation (Eg `BEGIN SELECT * FROM foo; ELECT * FROM bar; COMMIT`)

The only other idea I had to support this use case is `tikv-client txn set foo bar then get bar` or something like that and use a seperator... But I'm not sure this is nicer.

# TiKV Rust Client Command Line Tool

## Summary

> Use the TiKV Rust Client to build a simple command line tool for inspection and anaylsis.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This article describes how to the TiKV Rust Client to build a simple command line tool for inspection and analysis.
```

Author: This is an RFC, so this is a proposed action, not an instruction guide for someone. :) Thanks for the analysis correction!

This tool will stand as an analogue to `mycli` or `mysql-client` for users.

## Motivation

> Currently `tikv-ctl` offers some ways to interact with a TiKV cluster, it

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently `tikv-ctl` offers some ways to interact with a TiKV cluster, which
```

focuses mostly on the *management* of a TiKV cluster instead of a *client* for
the cluster.

> With the `tikv-client` Rust crate users will find a way to interact with their TiKV

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With the `tikv-client` Rust crate, users will find a way to interact with their TiKV
```

cluster from their application. Some users will find it desirable to be able to
inspect their cluster from a command line tool, or otherwise outside of their
application.

Building a simple command line tool to execute commands such as `get`, `set`,

> `delete`, and `scan` would mean users do not need to worry about creating such

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`delete`, or `scan` means users do not need to worry about creating such
```

tools for themselves.

It also provides us with a useful tool during the development cycle, as it will
be very easy to issue one-off commands to TiKV.

> Further, we mentioned in the Rust Client RFC

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Plus, this tool is one of the goals we mentioned in the Rust Client RFC
```

> (https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/pull/7) we mentioned we wanted to accomplish this.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/pull/7).
```

## Detailed design

> The client will be created using the `tikv-client` crate and its already existing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The client will be created using the `tikv-client` crate and existing
```

> functionality. It will utilize `clap` to provide a simple wrapper around the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
functionality of the crate.  `clap` will be used to provide a simple wrapper around the
```

crate API.

### Install

> We will build this tool in the `tikv-cli` repository. It will be published.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This tool will be built in the `tikv-cli` repository and published.
```

Users will be able to install it with `cargo install tikv-cli`. (See
*Alternatives* for another option.)

### Configuration

The tool will retrieve its configuration from one of the following places, in

> order of precedence (greatest to least):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
an order of precedence (greatest to least):
```

Author: "in an order of precedence" sounds like there are several orders instead of just one.

> * The command line options, such as `--pd 127.0.0.1:2379`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Command line options, such as `--pd 127.0.0.1:2379`.
```

* A local configuration file `./.tikv-cli.toml`

> * The global configuration file `${XDG_CONFIG_HOME}/tikv-cli.toml`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* A global configuration file `${XDG_CONFIG_HOME}/tikv-cli.toml`.
```

> * The default options (connect to localhost, no TLS).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Default options (connecting to localhost, no TLS).
```

The options are:

```toml
[connection]
# A list of `pd` endpoints.
# Default: None
pd_endpoints = [
    "127.0.0.1:2379",
    "127.0.0.2:2379",
]

[tls]
# The path of the CA file for TLS.
# Default: None
ca_path = "./rsa.ca"
# The path of the certificate file for TLS.
# Default: None
cert_path = "./rsa.cert"
# The path of the key file for TLS.
# Default: None
key_path = "./rsa.key"

[client]
# Level of logging to use.
# Available: critical, error, warning, info, debug, trace
# Default: info
logging = "info"
# If the ouput JSON should be minified.
# Default: false
minify = false
# The mode the client should be in.
# All clients connected to a keyspace should use the same mode.
# Available: raw, transaction
# Default: transaction
mode = "transaction"
# If the tool should output on stderr the duration of commands.
# Default: true
output-durations = true
```

On the command line, these options have the same name, but with `_` replaced
with `-` for idiomatic reasons.

### Input/Output

> By default input is by positional arguments in `bash`/`sh` string format.

Reviewer 3: by positional arguments？

Author: Yes, eg

```bash
tikv-cli get foo
         ^--^--- Positional Arguments
```

> By default the tool will output in prettyprinted JSON. For single entry results,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By default, the tool will output in pretty printed JSON. For single entry results,
```

it will return a string (including `"`), for key-value pairs it will use a JSON
object `{ key: "", value: "" }`, for multiple results it will return a JSON
array. Errors will use an `{ error: "" }` object. Opting out of prettyprint will
be via the `--minify` flag.

> JSON was chosen because it is an efficient, pervasive, human-readable, modern

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
JSON is chosen because it is an efficient, pervasive, human-readable, modern
```

standard that has many tools (eg `jq`) to use for post processing if needed.

All standard (non-logging) output will be on `stdout`.

It will feature configurable logging levels with `slog` which will output to `stderr`.

> The tool will exit zero on successful requests, and non-zero on unsuccessful

Reviewer 3: Can you explain exit zero to me?

Author: When a program finishes it returns an exit code, if it is zero it is successful, if it is not zero it is generally not successful. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exit_status

I clarified it.

requests. In the case of REPL mode, it shall exit zero unless the connection is
found to be lost.

### Interacting with it

> Users will interact with the tool through the command line. It will support both

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Users will interact with the tool through command line. It will support both
```

> a one-off mode or a REPL (Read-eval-print-loop) style mode (See alternatives).

Reviewer 3: Since it's the mode name, "a" is not needed here.
```suggestion
one-off mode and REPL (Read-eval-print-loop) style mode (See [Alternatives](#Alternatives)).
```

> TiKV has two APIs, *raw* and *transactional*, both are supported. Learn about the

Reviewer 3: "both are supported" where? In this tool?  Seems missing something.

$ tikv-cli --mode raw get "cncf"
"linux foundation"
Finished in 0.002s.
$ tikv-cli --mode raw scan "b"..
[
    { key: "cncf", value: "linux foundation" },
    { key: "tikv", value: "rust" },
]
Finished in 0.003s.
```

Example of REPL raw mode:

```bash
$ tikv-cli --mode raw
> set "cncf" "linux foundation"
Finished in 0.001s.
> set "tikv" "rust"
Finished in 0.001s.
> get "cncf"
"linux foundation"
Finished in 0.001s.
> scan "b"..
[
    { key: "cncf", value: "linux foundation" },
    { key: "tikv", value: "rust" },
]
Finished in 0.003s.
```

In the REPL of the *(default)* transactional mode below, the `>>` communicates
that the user is in a transaction. Also notice how the transaction timestamp is
outputted in the request complete messages.

```bash
$ tikv-cli
> begin
Finished in 0.000s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
>>set "cncf" "linux foundation"
Finished in 0.001s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
>> set "tikv" "rust"
Finished in 0.001s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
>> get "cncf"
"linux foundation"
Finished in 0.001s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
>> scan "b"..
[
    { key: "cncf", value: "linux foundation" },
    { key: "tikv", value: "rust" },
]
Finished in 0.003s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)
>> commit

> Finished in 0.001s. (txn ts: 1551216224838)

Reviewer 4: Could we print the `commit_ts` too?

Author: Always or configurable?

Reviewer 4: both are ok for me ^_^

```

> One-off transactional mode is a bit different, a series of commands can be

Reviewer 4: I think `Auto-commit mode` will be more understandable for me ^^

Author: I clarified the description and added that term :)

tools for themselves.

It also provides us with a useful tool during the development cycle, as it will
be very easy to issue one-off commands to TiKV.

Plus, this tool is one of the goals we mentioned in the Rust Client RFC
(https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/pull/7).

## Detailed design

The client will be created using the `tikv-client` crate and existing
functionality. `clap` and `serde` will be used to provide a simple wrapper
around the crate API.

### Install

This tool will be built in the `client-rust` repository. It will be published.
Users will be able to install it with
`cargo install tikv-client --features cli`. (See *Alternatives* for another option.)

### Configuration

The tool will retrieve its configuration from one of the following places, in
order of precedence (greatest to least):

* Command line flags, such as `--pd 127.0.0.1:2379`.
* A local configuration file `./.tikv-client.toml`
* A global configuration file `${XDG_CONFIG_HOME}/tikv-client.toml` (or
  comparable cross platform options)
* Default options (connect to localhost, no TLS).

The options are:

```toml
[connection]
# A list of `pd` endpoints.

> # Default: None

Reviewer 5: As for line 51 of this RFC, default should be localhost without TLS

```suggestion
# Default: 127.0.0.1:2379 (no TLS)
```

pd_endpoints = [
    "127.0.0.1:2379",
    "127.0.0.2:2379",
]

[tls]
# The path of the CA file for TLS.
# Default: None
ca_path = "./rsa.ca"
# The path of the certificate file for TLS.
# Default: None
cert_path = "./rsa.cert"
# The path of the key file for TLS.
# Default: None
key_path = "./rsa.key"

[client]
# Level of logging to use.
# Available: critical, error, warning, info, debug, trace
# Default: info
logging = "info"
# If the ouput JSON should be minified.
# Default: false
minify = false
# The mode the client should be in.
# All clients connected to a keyspace should use the same mode.
# Available: raw, transaction
# Default: transaction
mode = "transaction"
# If the tool should output on stderr the duration of commands.
# Default: true
output_durations = true
# Control the encoding.
# TiKV has a Unified Key Format which is used in cases where a more human readable format is
# required for non-UTF-8 data.

> # Avaiable: utf-8, ukf, profobuffer, hex

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
# Avaiable: utf-8, ukf, protobuffer, hex
```

> key-encoding = "utf-8"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
key_encoding = "utf-8"
```

> value-encoding = "utf-8"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
value_encoding = "utf-8"
```

On the command line, these options have the same name, but with `_` replaced
with `-` for idiomatic reasons.

### Input/Output

By default input is by positional arguments in `bash`/`sh` string format.

By default the tool will output in prettyprinted JSON. For single entry results,
it will return a string (including `"`), for key-value pairs it will use a JSON
object `{ key: "", value: "" }`, for multiple results it will return a JSON
array. Errors will use an `{ error: "" }` object. Opting out of prettyprint will
be via the `--minify` flag.

JSON is chosen because it is an efficient, pervasive, human-readable, modern
standard that has many tools (eg `jq`) to use for post processing if needed.

All standard (non-logging) output will be on `stdout`.

It will feature configurable logging levels with `slog` which will output to `stderr`.

The tool will exit with exit code zero on successful requests, and non-zero on unsuccessful
requests. In the case of REPL mode, it shall exit zero unless the connection is
found to be lost.

TiKV is often used in cases where a key or value is not a UTF-8 compatible
string, or may print undesirable control characters to the console. We provide the

> `key-encoding` and `value-encoding` configuration options to control this.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`key_encoding` and `value_encoding` configuration options to control this.
```

For most users, their natural first attempt with the client will be to use UTF-8
strings for both keys and values. In order to prevent confusion, we default to
UTF-8 for both and make the options for `*-encoding` discoverable.

> The `key-encoding` and `value-encoding` options support `utf-8`, `ukf` (TiKV's

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The `key_encoding` and `value_encoding` options support `utf-8`, `ukf` (TiKV's
```
